Abstract

We show that an easy-to-scale intervention that helps young job-seekers to signal their ability to employers can generate large improvements in labor market outcomes. We are also uniquely able to compare this intervention (the ‘job application workshop’) to a transport subsidy treatment designed to reduce search costs. We find that in the short-run both interventions have large positive effects on the probability of finding formal jobs. The workshop also helps young people access stable jobs with an open- ended contract. Four years later, the workshop has a large and significant impact on earnings, while the effects of the subsidy have dissipated. The results are driven largely by groups that are at the greatest disadvantage in the labor market, leading to strong equity gains. Our results show the crucial role that effective signalling of skills can play in supporting the inclusion of youth in the labor market.

1 An experiment to help youth access the labour market

Throughout the world, young people work less, earn less and face more job insecurity compared to older workers. This is a major policy challenge, especially in Africa, the youngest continent in the world, with a population of almost 200 million people aged between 15 and 24. If excluded from economic opportunity, young people can represent a major source of instability for the continent. If employed productively, they can turn into a key asset for growth.

We investigate these competing views on the inclusion of young people in the labour market by running two parallel field experiments with a representative sample of over 3,000 young people in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.1 The first intervention – aimed at reducing the cost of job search – is a transport subsidy. Participants are reimbursed for the cost of a bus fare from their place of residence to the centre of the city, where they can find information about jobs and visit firms, up to three times a week. The second intervention – aimed at improving the ability to signal skills – is a job application workshop. We certify young people’s general skills using a mix of standardised personnel selection tests. Further, we offer orientation on how to signal skills in job applications and job interviews. We evaluate these programs through two endline surveys, eight months and then approximately four years after the end of the interventions.

We find starkly different results from the two interventions. In the short run (eight months after treatment), the transport intervention increases job-search intensity and has significant impacts on the probability of having a formal job. However, four years later, we find that these effects have dissipated completely. Lowering search costs can help workers to obtain a formal job more quickly, but it does not change long-term employment out- comes. The job application workshop, in contrast, shows long-lasting effects. In the short run, it increases the probability of both permanent and formal work without increasing the intensity of job-search. Four years after treatment, the workshop also shows a large pos- itive impact on earnings, which amounts to a 20% increase over the control group mean. Improving the ability to signal skills thus changes young people’s long-term prospects in the labour market.

2.3 Treatment 1: The transport subsidy

Individuals in this treatment group are offered a subsidy to cover the cost of traveling to the city centre. The subsidy takes the form of a cash transfer that is conditional on visiting a disbursement point, located in an office in the centre of Addis Ababa.12 Recipients are required to attend in person, and to show photographic ID on each visit. Each recipient can collect cash once a day, up to three times a week. The daily amount is sufficient to cover the cost of a return bus fare from the participant’s area of residence at baseline to the disbursement point.13 To access the subsidy, job-seekers need to have (or borrow) enough cash to make the first journey – which in our setting is almost always the case.14

Prior to the intervention, respondents in our sample do not travel frequently to the city centre.15 By paying participants conditional upon their presence at our office, we directly incentivise travel to the centre. This allows us to focus on spatial constraints to job search.16 In addition, conditional transfers are a more realistic policy option in this context. Uncon- ditional transfers have proved unpopular among voters in various countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (Ferguson, 2015; Sandefur et al., 2015) and the Ethiopian Government requests that the beneficiaries of social assistance programs are employed in public work schemes.17

The median subsidy available on a given day is equal to 20 Ethiopian Birr (1 USD at the exchange rate at the beginning of the intervention). This equals about two thirds of the median weekly expenditure on job search at baseline, and 10 percent of overall weekly expenditure. The minimum amount is 15 ETB (0.75 USD) and the maximum 30 ETB (1.5 USD). On average, each person in this treatment group receives a transfer of about 191 ETB (9.3 USD). The full cost of the intervention, which comprises both direct transfers and other variable costs, is 19.8 USD per person.

For logistical reasons, we stagger the start time and the end time of the subsidy, ran- domly. This generates variation across individuals in the number of weeks during which the treatment is available, and in the time of treatment. The number of weeks of treatment varied from 13 to 20, with a median of 16 weeks.18 The intervention was implemented between September 2014 and January 2015.

2.4 Treatment 2: The job application workshop

The job application workshop is designed to improve job-seekers’ ability to present their skills accurately to potential employers, thus overcoming the challenge of anonymity that youths with limited work experience typically face. The intervention has two components: an orientation session and a certification session. The orientation session helps participants to make more effective use of their existing signals (job experience, education, etc.). In the certification session, we certify skills that are ‘hard to observe’ for employers, such as cognitive ability, and we provide participants with an instrument (the certificates) to signal those skills. The design aims to mimic the orientation services available to job-seekers in several countries.19

The intervention takes place over two days. On the first day, participants take a series of personnel selection tests. On the second day, they attend the orientation session. The intervention was administered by the School of Commerce of Addis Ababa University, between September and October 2014. The School of Commerce has a reputation for reli- able personnel selection services; many firms screen applicants using tests developed, and sometimes administered, by the School of Commerce.20

The orientation session covers three main topics: CV writing, application letters and job interviews. All the training materials were developed by the School of Commerce and later reviewed by our team. The certification session includes four tests: (i) a Raven matrices test, (ii) a test of linguistic ability in Amharic, (iii) a test of mathematical ability and (iv) a ‘work-sample’ test. The results of the tests are presented in a certificate, which job-seekers can use in support of their job applications. The certificates explain the nature of the tests and report the relative grade of the individual for each test, and an aggregate measure of performance.21 The certificates are officially issued by the School of Commerce and the Ethiopian Development Research Institute.22

We chose the tests on the basis of the results of several qualitative interviews with firm managers in the city.23 The Raven test is a widely used measure of cognitive ability (Raven, 2000). It is believed to be one of the best predictors of worker productivity (Schmidt and Hunter, 1998; Chamorro-Premuzic and Furnham, 2010) and it has been used by economists to measure worker quality in several contexts (Dal Bó et al., 2013; Beaman et al., 2013). The tests of mathematical and linguistic ability were designed to capture general mathematical and linguistic skills, as in the OECD’s PIAAC survey or the World Bank’s STEP survey (OECD, 2013; Pierre et al., 2014). The ‘work-sample’ test captures participants’ ability to carry out simple work tasks: taking minutes during a business meeting, carrying out a data entry task under time pressure, and meeting a deadline to complete a data entry task at home. The literature in organisational psychology suggests that ‘work-sample’ tests can be used alongside measures of cognitive ability to predict worker performance (Schmidt and Hunter, 1998). We report some summary statistics of the tests in Table A.1 of the Appendix.24

Per person, the intervention cost about 35 USD, including fixed costs related to develop- ing the tests. Excluding these fixed costs, the sum is 18.2 USD — a figure in line with other recent information interventions (Dammert et al., 2015; Bassi and Nansamba, 2017).

3 Experimental design and estimation strategy 3.1 The sample

To obtain our experimental sample, we began by drawing a random selection of geographic clusters from the list of Ethiopian Central Agency (CSA) enumeration areas.25 Given our interest in spatial constraints, we excluded all clusters within 2.5 km from the city centre and those outside the city boundaries. To minimise potential spillovers, we did not select any directly adjacent clusters.

Within our selected clusters, we sought respondents of direct interest to active labour market policies. Specifically, we used door-to-door sampling to construct a list of all in- dividuals who: (i) were between 18 and 29 years of age; (ii) had completed high school; (iii) were available to start working in the next three months; and (iv) were not currently working in a permanent job or enrolled in full time education. We randomly sampled individuals from this list to be included in the study. Our lists included individuals with different levels of education. We sampled with higher frequency from the groups with higher education, to ensure that individuals with vocational training and university de- grees are well represented in the study; we estimate using appropriate sampling weights. In all, we interviewed 3,052 individuals who are included in our experimental study.26

How does our sample compare to the youth population of Addis Ababa? The online appendix shows that individuals in our experiment are on average more educated than the overall youth population (Table A.2).27 This is due to the fact that we exclude from our study all job-seekers who have not completed high-school. On the other hand, since we only focus on individuals who do not have a permanent job at baseline, workers in our sample have significantly worse labour market outcomes than the general population, including among those with comparable education levels (Table A.3). Overall, we estimate that about 20% of all youth in Addis Ababa would be eligible for our study.

3.2 Data collection: Face-to-face and the phone survey

We collected data on study participants through both face-to-face and phone interviews. We completed baseline face-to-face interviews between May and July 2014 and endline interviews between June and August 2015. Face-to-face interviews recorded information about the socio-demographic characteristics of study participants, their education, work history, finances, expectations and attitudes. We also collected an incentivised measure of present bias.28 We did not inform study participants at baseline that some of them would be offered job search assistance.

Between the baseline and the first endline, we also constructed a rich, high-frequency panel through fortnightly phone interviews. We called all study participants throughout the duration of the study. In these interviews we administered a short questionnaire fo- cused on job search and employment.29

3.3 Randomisation

We randomly assigned geographic clusters to one of the treatment arms or the control group. To ensure balance, we created blocks of clusters with similar baseline observables and randomly assigned clusters within each block to the different treatment groups (Bruhn and McKenzie, 2009).30

Not all individuals in the clusters assigned to the transport intervention and job appli- cation workshop were offered treatment. Among those in the transport clusters, we imple- mented a randomised saturation design. We varied the proportion of sampled individuals who were offered treatment from 20% to 40%, 75% and 90%. In clusters assigned to the job application workshop we kept the level of saturation fixed at 80%. Having set cluster saturation levels, we assigned individuals within each cluster to a treatment or a control group. This was done by blocking individuals within clusters by their education level, and implementing a simple re-randomisation rule. The overall assignment to treatment is outlined in Table 1.31

4.1 Short-run impacts

Table 2 reports the main impacts on our pre-specified family of six primary outcomes.40 We find no significant average treatment effects on the probability of having a job, on hours worked, on earnings or on job satisfaction. Existing meta-analyses show that, in the short run, active labour market policies on average increase employment rates by about 1.6-2 percentage points and earnings by about 7 percent (Card et al., 2015; McKenzie, 2017). The effect sizes that we document are in line with these figures. Employment rates increase by 3.8 percentage points for individuals in the transport treatment, and by 2 percentage points for individuals who were invited to the job-application workshop (both statistically insignificant). Further, the workshop is associated with an (insignificant) 6.2 percent in- crease in earnings, while the effect of the transport intervention on earnings is very close to zero.

5.2 Who benefits the most from the workshop?

We conclude by showing evidence of the strong equity-enhancing effects of the job appli- cation workshop. We do this by conducting a series of sub-group analyses using a list of covariates specified in our pre-analysis plan. Further, to identify a common pattern across multiple dimensions, we study treatment impacts by predicted earnings. This allows us to identify the most disadvantaged workers as those with relatively low predicted earnings based on a large vector of baseline covariates (the first-stage coefficients of the model used for the predictions are reported in Table ??). We then use a ‘split sample’ method to esti- mate treatment heterogeneity between high predicted earnings and low predicted earnings individuals Abadie et al. (2017).

We find that the effects of the workshop are significantly larger for the most disadvan- taged. In particular, we show in Table 5 that the least educated, the least experienced, and those with the lowest expected earnings benefit the most from the interventions. For other dimensions, we are unable to find significant differences in response to treatment.51 The size of the effects for the worst-off workers is substantial. For example, young people without tertiary education increase the earnings by almost 60 percent, while the low pre- dicted earnings group experiences a 50 percent increase. This causes a large reduction in earning inequality: the earning gap between the low and the high earnings group drops from 142 percent to 54 percent and, strikingly, the gap between experienced and inexpe- rienced workers is fully erased. Overall, these results illustrate the large equity gains that can be generated by helping young workers to access the labour market through improved signalling.
